---
layout: post
title: "Jekyll + Github = Future Proof Blog"
---

So I've often thought about starting a blog to publish solutions to technical problems that I thought would be of 
help to others. My recent discovery of [Jekyll](https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll) (a blog aware static site 
generator) was the sweet spot I'd been waiting for between writing a 100% static site myself and using one of the 
popular blogging platforms like Wordpress. Coupled with Github's support for Jekyll it makes for a really 
simple workflow for creating and updating your site. 

Why I like Jekyll:

- I wanted completed control over the html generated.
- I wanted complete control over the site style without having to contend with a complicated theme framework.
- The content for my site is written in markdown, meaning that it's future proofed against new versions of HTML
assuming that the appropriate `md` -> `new html version` generators are created. There's no databases involved 
meaning no messy backup / schema upgrades are required. 
- It does just enough work that its saving me time (integrating new posts) but not so much that it starts hiding 
parts of the page generation process away where you can't get at it easily. 

<!--more-->

Why I like Github's support for Jekyll:

- My site is checked into a rock solid version control system as part of its normal workflow.
- Ummm... its free hosting! You can even point your own domain name at it.
 

### What does the workflow look like

At it's most basic:

1. Create a github repo called (github_username).github.com
2. Check out this github repo and populate it with a Jekyll website.
3. Push back to remote. 
4. Github detects you have a jekyll website and fires up the jekyll ruby gem to process and generate the static pages
for your site. It then starts serving them from http://(github_username).github.com.

To add new posts to a Jekyll based blog:

1. You create a new post file with the naming format `YYYY-MM-DD-<your post name>.md` in the `_posts` folder.
2. Push the changes back to the remote on github (you can also run the jekyll ruby gem locally to see what is likely
to be generated by github).
3. When the jekyll ruby gem is called to generate the static content for this site it will convert these markdown files
into html and provides you with a simple scripting language to hook this new post into a list of latest posts 
for example. 

